docs(proposal): externaldns api graduation to beta (#5079)
kubernetes-sigs/external-dns: docs/proposal/003-dnsendpoint-graduation-to-beta.md

```yaml
---
title: "Proposal: Defining a path to Beta for DNSEndpoint API"
version: v1alpha1
authors: @ivankatliarchuk, @raffo, @szuecs
creation-date: 2025-02-09

> status: proposal

Author: ```suggestion
status: approved
```

---
```

> # Proposal: Agree on requirements for API DNSEndpoint to graduate to beta

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Proposal: Defining a path to Beta for DNSEndpoint API
```

Currently, it remains in the alpha stage, limiting its adoption due to potential instability and lack of guaranteed backward compatibility. By advancing to beta, we can provide users with a more reliable API and encourage wider adoption with confidence in its long-term viability and support.

### Goals

- Define the necessary requirements for `DNSEndpoint` API to reach beta status.
- Improve API stability, usability, and documentation.
- Improve test coverage, automate documentation creation, and validation mechanisms.
- Ensure backward compatibility and migration strategies from alpha to beta.
- Collect and incorporate feedback from existing users to refine the API.
- Address any identified issues or limitations in the current API design.

### Non-Goals

- This proposal does not cover the graduation of ExternalDNS itself to a stable release.
- Making `DNSEndpoint` a stable (GA) API at this stage.
- It does not include implementation details for specific DNS providers.
- It does not introduce new functionality beyond stabilizing the DNSEndpoint API.
- Redesigning the API from scratch.

> - Introducing breaking changes that would require significant refactoring for existing users.

Reviewer: That's definitely a non goal :D

## Proposal

The proposal aims to formalize the promotion process by addressing API design, user needs, and implementation details.

To graduate the `DNSEndpoint` API to beta, we propose the following actions:

1. Capture feedback from the community on missing functionality for DNSEndpoint CRD
   - In a form of Github issue, pin the issue to the project
   - Link all CRD related issues to it
2. Refactor `endpoint` folder, move away `api/crd` related stuff to `apis/<apiVersion> folder`
3. Documentation for API to be generated automatically with test coverage, similar to `docs/flags.md`

> 4. API(s) and CRD(s) discoverable. [doc.crds.dev](https://doc.crds.dev/github.com/kubernetes-sigs/external-dns). Example [crosplane](https://doc.crds.dev/github.com/crossplane/crossplane@v0.10.0)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. APIs and CRDs discoverable. [doc.crds.dev](https://doc.crds.dev/github.com/kubernetes-sigs/external-dns). Example [crossplane](https://doc.crds.dev/github.com/crossplane/crossplane@v0.10.0)
```
On this specific point, it worked in the past:
https://doc.crds.dev/github.com/kubernetes-sigs/external-dns@v0.7.6
I'm not sure what has caused this in recent versions.

***APIs versioned independently***

```yml
├── apis
│   ├── dnsendpoint
│   │   ├── v1alpha
│   │   │   ├── util/validation
│   │   │   ├── doc.go
│   │   │   └── zz_generated.***.go
│   │   ├── v1beta  # outside of scope currently, just an example
│   │   │   ├── util/validation
│   │   │   ├── doc.go
│   │   │   └── zz_generated.***.go
│   │   ├── v1       # outside of scope currently, just an example
│   │   │   ├── util/validation
│   │   │   ├── doc.go
│   │   │   └── zz_generated.***.go
│   ├── dnsentry
│   │   ├── v1alpha
```

### User Stories

#### Story 1: Cluster Operator/Admin Managing External DNS

*As a cluster operator or administrator*, I want a stable `DNSEndpoint` API to reliably manage DNS records within Kubernetes so that I can ensure consistent and automated DNS resolution for my services.

#### Story 2: Developers Integrating External DNS

*As a developer*, I want a well-documented `DNSEndpoint` API that allows me to programmatically define and manage DNS records without worrying about breaking changes.

#### Story 3: Cloud-Native Deployments

> *As an SRE*, I need a tested and validated `DNSEndpoint` API that integrates seamlessly with cloud-native networking services, ensuring high availability and scalability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*As a SRE*, I need a tested and validated `DNSEndpoint` API that integrates seamlessly with cloud-native networking services, ensuring high availability and scalability.
```
